docs: ADR 003 - Client scope and usage (#2429)
kyma-project/lifecycle-manager: docs/contributor/adr/003-client-scope-and-usage.md

The client will **only** be referenced in the Repository layer. All other layers, such as Service and Reconciler, will remain decoupled from infrastructure concerns and interact only through higher-level abstractions defined in the application domain.

### Do's

A Service defines its dependecy named *Repository. The Repository implementation then uses controller-runtime's Client interfaces directly.
```go 
type SomeService struct {
	manifestRepository ManifestRepository
}

type ManifestRepository interface {
	Get(name, namespace string) (*v1beta2.Manifest, error)
}
```
```go
type ManifestRepositoryImpl struct {
	readClient client.Reader
}
```
Another example, for more than only read:
```go
type ManifestRepository interface {
    Get(name, namespace string) (*v1beta2.Manifest, error)
    Create(name, namespace string) error
    Update(*v1beta2.Manifest) error
}
```
```go
type ManifestRepositoryImpl struct {
	kcpClient client.Client
}
```

### Don'ts

> 1. The Service defines a dependency named *Client and uses it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These configuration options are non-compliant with the decision:

1 . The Service defines a dependency as `[Prefix]Client` and uses it:
```

# ADR 003 - Client scope and usage

## Status

Accepted

## Context

> Our current application architecture includes direct references to the Kubernetes client interface across multiple layers, such as the Reconciler and to be Service layers. This leads to a violation of the separation of concerns and tightly couples orchestration and business logic to infrastructure-specific code.

Author: Yes, we have a ADR to introduce this layering and also will agree on Naming in a separate ADR.

The client will **only** be referenced in the Repository layer. All other layers, such as Service and Reconciler, will remain decoupled from infrastructure concerns and interact only through higher-level abstractions defined in the application domain.

### Do's

A Service defines its dependecy named *Repository. The Repository implementation then uses controller-runtime's Client interfaces directly.
```go 
type SomeService struct {
	manifestRepository ManifestRepository
}

type ManifestRepository interface {
	Get(name, namespace string) (*v1beta2.Manifest, error)
}
```
```go
type ManifestRepositoryImpl struct {
	readClient client.Reader
}
```
Another example, for more than only read:
```go
type ManifestRepository interface {
    Get(name, namespace string) (*v1beta2.Manifest, error)
    Create(name, namespace string) error
    Update(*v1beta2.Manifest) error
}
```
```go
type ManifestRepositoryImpl struct {
	kcpClient client.Client
}
```

### Don'ts

> The Service defines a dependency named *Client and uses it:

Author: See other comment

```go
type SomeService struct {
	manifestClient ManifestClient
}

type ManifestClient interface {
	Get(name, namespace string) (*v1beta2.Manifest, error)
}

> ```

Reviewer: Please indent the code block so that it appears under point 1.

> Mitigation: It should be called *Repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Mitigation: The dependency must be called `*Repository`.
```

> The Service consumes the defined ManifestRespository interface as an embedded field:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The Service consumes the defined the `ManifestRepository` interface as an embedded field:
```

```go
type SomeService struct {
	ManifestRepository
}

type ManifestRepository interface {
	Get(name, namespace string) (*v1beta2.Manifest, error)
}

> ```

Reviewer: Please indent the code block so that it appears under point 2.

> Mitigation: It should be referenced as a named, private field so it can not be accessed across the package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Mitigation: The `ManifestRepository` interface must be referenced as a named, private field so it can not be accessed across the package.
```

> The Repository implementation defines its own intermediate composition interface from controller-runtime interfaces:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The Repository implementation defines its own intermediate composition interface from controller-runtime interfaces:
```

```go
type ManifestRepository struct {
	manifestClient manifestClient
}

type manifestClient interface {
	client.Writer
	client.Reader
}

> ```

Reviewer: Please indent the code block so that it appears under point 3.

> Mitigation: It should use the `client.Client` directly if more than one sub interface is needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Mitigation: The Repository implementation must use the `client.Client` directly if more than one sub-interface is needed.
```

## Consequences

> - The Repository layer becomes the single point of interaction with the Kubernetes API, improving separation of concerns and making the system easier to reason about

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Repository layer becomes the single point of interaction with the Kubernetes API, improving separation of concerns and making the system easier to reason about.
```

- By using specific sub-interfaces (e.g., Reader, Writer) when possible, dependencies are minimized, and unit testing becomes simpler and more focused.

> - Higher layers (Service, Reconciler) remain infrastructure-agnostic, promoting separation of concerns and better testability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Higher layers (Service, Reconciler) remain infrastructure-agnostic, promoting separation of concerns and better testability.
```

> - We rely directly on the controller-runtime client interfaces, which reduces boilerplate but ties our implementation closely to that library’s abstractions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We rely directly on the controller-runtime client interfaces, which reduces boilerplate but ties our implementation closely to that library’s abstractions.
```

# ADR 003 - Client scope and usage

## Status

Accepted

## Context

Our current application architecture includes direct references to the Kubernetes client interface across multiple layers, such as the Reconciler and to be Service layers. This leads to a violation of the separation of concerns and tightly couples orchestration and business logic to infrastructure-specific code.

> To address this, we will adopt a 3-tier architecture, where infrastructure dependencies like the Kubernetes client should only be referenced within the Repository layer. This change aligns with our architectural goal of modularity and improves testability and maintainability, ensuring a clear boundary between data access and business logic or orchestration components.

Reviewer 2: Completely valid, I would prefer to have this a separate small ADR about the target architecture. This ADR is then only about decision and consequences of using `client.Client` in the repository layer.

Author: The target architecture is defined [here](https://github.com/kyma-project/lifecycle-manager/pull/2453), as discussed.
Still for context and layer location this is an important information. I shortened it a bit. Is it ok for you like this?

Given this, we have choices:
- Create our own simplified interfaces that align with our usage and ignore the embedded interfaces
- Use the client.Client interface directly in the Repository layer
- Create an internal interface that embeds a subset or all of the controller-runtime interfaces

This decision will influence how we encapsulate data access logic aka kube API access and how flexible our system will be for testing.

Furthermore the 

## Decision

We will use the `client.Client` interface provided by `controller-runtime` directly in the Repository layer and avoid creating custom interfaces or client implementations. This approach minimizes unnecessary abstraction and leverages the mature, well-tested interfaces provided by the Kubernetes ecosystem.

> Whenever possible, we will reference the most specific sub-interface from the `client.Client` composition (e.g., `Reader`, `Writer`) rather than the full `Client` interface. This promotes better adherence to the Interface Segregation Principle and allows for more precise dependency injection, leading to simpler and more focused unit tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whenever possible, we will reference the most specific sub-interface from the `client.Client` composition (e.g., `Reader`, `Writer`) rather than the full `Client` interface. This promotes better adherence to the Interface Segregation Principle and allows for more precise dependency injection, leading to simpler and more focused unit tests. If methods from multiple sub-interfaces are needed, the `client.Client` is used.

In addition, we store the client as private field of the struct using it. We explicitly do not want to embed the client interface as public field into the struct.
```

> The client will **only** be referenced in the Repository layer. All other layers, such as Service and Reconciler, will remain decoupled from infrastructure concerns and interact only through higher-level abstractions defined in the application domain.

Reviewer 2: I would also see this as part of the other ADR that clearly defines what layer is supposed to talk with what other layer.

Author: Will create that ADR specifically. 😄

Author: PR: https://github.com/kyma-project/lifecycle-manager/pull/2453

## Consequences

- The Repository layer becomes the single point of interaction with the Kubernetes API, improving separation of concerns and making the system easier to reason about
- By using specific sub-interfaces (e.g., Reader, Writer) when possible, dependencies are minimized, and unit testing becomes simpler and more focused.
- Higher layers (Service, Reconciler) remain infrastructure-agnostic, promoting separation of concerns and better testability

> - We rely directly on the controller-runtime client interfaces, which reduces boilerplate but ties our implementation closely to that library’s abstractions

Reviewer 2: Points 1 and 3 would also be in the other ADR in my opinion.

Author: See previously mentioned PR.
